Chebyshev Series Coefficients of a Function
    







      E406: Chebyshev Series Coefficients of a Function
    



          Author(s): T. Håvie
        

          Library: MATHLIB
        



          Submitter: K.S. Kölbig
        

          Submitted: 24.01.1986
        



          Language: Fortran
        

          Revised: 01.12.1994
        







      Subroutine subprograms RCHECF, DCHECF and
      QCHECF calculate coefficients for a finite sum of
      Chebyshev polynomials approximating a function
      f(x) over an interval  to accuracy  . It
      returns an integer n and coefficients  such that the sum
    




      where t = (2x - a -
      b)/(b - a) and  is the Chebyshev polynomial of degree
      j, satisfies for  the
      relation
    




      Subsequent evaluation of the approximation (1) can be done by
      calling CHSUM (E407) with the appropriate value of
      its argument MODE.
    

      On computers other than CDC and Cray, only the double- and
      quadruple-precision versions DCHECF and
      QCHECF are available. On CDC and Cray computers,
      only the single- and double-precision versions
      RCHECF and DCHECF are available.
    

Structure:


SUBROUTINE subprogram
      User Entry Names: RCHECF, DCHECF, QCHECF
      Obsolete User Entry Names: CHECF 
RCHECF
      Files Referenced: Unit 6
      External References: MTLMTR,
      ABEND, user-supplied
      FUNCTION subprogram
    

Usage:


      For  (type
      REAL),  (type
      DOUBLE PRECISION),  (type REAL*16),
    

    CALL tCHECF(F,A,B,EPS,C,N,DELTA)



        F
      

        (type according to t) Name of a user-supplied
        FUNCTION subprogram, declared EXTERNAL in
        the calling program.
      

        A,B
      

        (type according to t) End-points
        a,b of the approximation interval.
      

        EPS
      

        (type according to t) Requested accuracy.
      

        C
      

        (type according to t) One-dimensional array with
        dimension (0:d),  . On exit,  .
      

        N
      

        (INTEGER) On exit, N is equal to the
        subscript of the last computed coefficient.
      

        DELTA
      

        (type according to t) On exit, DELTA is
        such that the relation 
        is almost certainly true for  . (See Error Handling.)
      


Method:


      The interval [a,b] is subdivided
      successively into sets of subintervals of length  . After each
      subdivision the orthogonality properties of the Chebyshev
      polynomials with respect to summation over equally-spaced
      points are used to compute two sets of approximate values of
      the coefficients  : one set
      computed using the end-points of the subintervals, and one
      set using the mid-points. The mean of these two values is
      taken as the best estimate of the  , which are then tested to see (a) whether
      certain rate-of-convergence criteria are satisfied, (b)
      whether there is some n for which the sum for
      j>n of the available  is less than  .
      If both conditions are satisfied the subroutine terminates.
    

Error handling:


      Error E406.1: If the requested accuracy cannot be
      obtained with 65 coefficients (i.e.,  ) a message is written on Unit 6,
      unless subroutine MTLSET (N002) has been called. In
      this case, values of 
      computed from (1) with 
      should still be in error by less than DELTA.
    

Notes:


This subroutine is intended for use with functions
      f(x) which can be computed to full machine
      accuracy, and which are sufficiently smooth to ensure fairly
      rapid decrease of the 
      with increasing j. Functions defined by experimental
      data can usually be approximated better by least-squares
      methods, using ordinary polynomials.
      
Note that some authors use a different definition for the
      constant term in (1), i.e.  instead of  . Here, the definition of Ref. 1 is used.
      


References:


Y.L. Luke, Mathematical functions and their
      approximations, (Academic Press, New York 1975)
      






      Michel Goossens Wed Jun 5 03:37:01 METDST 1996